                                 PedStr
                 Software for splitting large pedigrees
         into fragments of no more than a user-specified bit size


DESCRIPTION
Genetic analysis of large extended human pedigrees pedigrees is 
computationally challenging. Because of performance limits of current 
soft- and hardware, investigators have to simplify the pedigree structure by 
breaking pedigree loops or splitting a large pedigree into smaller fragments.

PedStr is a software for splitting large pedigrees into fragments of no more 
than a user-specified bit size. The algorithm specifically aims to split 
large pedigrees where many close relatives are genotyped and to produce a set 
of sub-pedigrees for haplotype reconstruction, IBD computation or multipoint 
linkage analysis with the help of Lander-Green-Kruglyak algorithm. 

The bit size is defined as twice the number of individuals with ancestors 
in the pedigree minus the number of pedigree founders.

We used modified PEDIG program (Boichard, 2002) for estimation of relationship 
coefficients. 
     Boichard D. PEDIG: a fortran package for pedigree analysis 
     suited for large populations. In Proceedings of the 7th World 
     Congress on Genetics Applied to Livestock Production, Montpellier, 
     2002-08-19/23 2002; 32: 525-528.

There are two versions of PedStr software: PedStr_H and PedStr_L.

First version is called PedStr_H. It splits large pedigrees into 
overlapping sub-pedigrees for haplotype reconstruction.

Second version is called PedStr_L. It splits large pedigrees into 
non-overlapping sub-pedigrees for IBD computation or multipoint linkage 
analysis with the help of Lander-Green-Kruglyak algorithm.


ALGORITHM

In general, within the framework of our algorithm, we want to achieve a 
compromise between the computational performance (as measured with the 
maximal bit size) and linkage power or accuracy of haplotype reconstruction. 
Our basic assumption is that the sub-pedigrees informative for multipoint 
linkage analysis or haplotypes reconstruction should contain closely related 
genotyped people, i.e. the total relationship between sub-pedigree members 
should be as large as possible for a given bit size. 

First step. Sub-pedigrees are built around each genotyped person step 
by step including his/her closest relatives in the set of sub-pedigree members 
and controlling the sub-pedigree bit size. 

Second step. Total coefficient of relationship for all 
measured person within each sub-pedigrees is calculated. 

Third step is different for PedStr_H and PedStr_L versions.

PedStr_H: a minimum set of overlapping sub-pedigrees which guarantees 
high quality of haplotype reconstruction for all genotyped persons, is 
selected.

PedStr_L: a sub-pedigree with maximum total relationship is selected, 
all members of this sub-pedigree are indicated as unmeasured in initial 
data set; the steps are repeated until all members of initial pedigree
are indicated ad unmeasured.

In detail the algorith is described in algorithm.pdf file.


PACKAGE STRUCTURE
Each version is organized into three folders: BIN, EXAMPLE, and 
SOURCE.
BIN folder contains compiled executable files for Linux and Windows 
operation systems.
Examples of input and output files are in EXAMPLE folder.
Source code files are in SOURCE folder.


RUNNING
For splitting pedigree with PedStr software user should copy executable file 
PedStr_H or PedStr_L, file with options pedstr.ini and input file into one 
folder.

pedstr.ini is file where user should define names of input and output files,
and maximum bit-size. For PedStr_L user should also define maximum number 
of unmeasured relatives connecting a pair of measured persons. It allows us 
to prevent building of large sub-pedigrees with only few measured 
persons wich are distant relatives.

Structure of input file.
Pedigree data must be written in standart LINKAGE format.
Each line in input file is a data on a person where should be:
pedigree number
person's ID (it should be consecutive from the first person to the last)
father's ID
mother's ID
sex (1 - male, 2 - female)
measured status (0 - unmeasured, any other number - measured)

Separators are space (spaces), tab or coma.
For example:
1   1   0   0   1   0
1   2   0   0   2   1
1   3   0   0   2   0
1   4   0   0   1   0
1   5   1   2   2   1
1   6   1   2   1   1
1   7   4   3   1   0
1   8   7   5   1   1


For splitting pedigree user should run executable file (PedStr_H or PedStr_L).

Structure of output file is the same as structure of input file.
Each line in output file is a data on a person where are:
sub-pedigree number (new numbering)
person's ID (in accordance with input file)
father's ID
mother's ID
sex (1 - male, 2 - female)
measured status (0 - unmeasured, any other number - measured)

PedStr is Copyright (c) 2008 Erasmus MC Rotterdam and ICG Novosibirsk
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under 
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software 
Foundation, either version 2 of the License, or (at your opinion) any later 
version. This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but 
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or 
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

LANGUAGE:  FORTRAN77

OS: Linux, Windows
